well a Dutch court has ordered the
government to stop delivering parts for
F-35 fighter jets to Israel the court
upheld an appeal made by human rights
organizations which argued that
supplying the parts contributed to
Israel's alleged violations of
international law the ruling requires
the Netherlands to Cease the export and
Transit of any parts destined for Israel
within 7 Days the parts are American
owned but they're stored in a Dutch
warehouse and then exported onto several
Partners well let's go straight to to
our correspondent step vasson she joins
us now on the phone from Amsterdam in
the Netherlands step as we were just
reporting this was an appeal court
ruling after another Court allowed these
exports to go ahead in December can you
talk us through the significance of
what's just taken place how much of a
difference will this
make well this is absolutely a landmark
Verdict by the appeal court in the ha
because this is the first time since the
war in Gaza started that a country is
now ordered by a court to stop sending
weapons to Israel so in 30 minutes
verdict the judge really said that
Israel is there is a real risk of
violating international law and
humanitarian laws of war he dismissed
all the arguments that the state the
Dutch state had in uh saying that they
need to send these F-35 spare parts to
Israel uh talking about political
reasons they're very close ties to the
United States but also economic reasons
but the judge dismissed all of it saying
we have to look at the risk of where
these spare parts are going to be used
and he said what Israel is doing now in
Gaza has really very high risk of
violating uh these rules of Law and it's
very clear that the f35s are used during
this war he said so the Dutch state has
to stop sending them within the next
seven days so this is a very serious
blow for the Dutch government because
they did win the the case in the first
Court uh and this case is of course
filed by NGS by oxom no and other NOS
but they kept on uh appealing so this is
now yeah a land Landmark ruling uh and
as you said this distribution center for
the f-35s is based in the Netherlands
they're going to be sent they send all
these fighter jet planes to the
Netherlands all the spare parts are
collected there and they're going to be
sent to uh all over Europe and also
including Israel but that last country
can't get these spers in the next seven
days step I was um really noticing that
the court statement was very specific it
says that these parts were and I quote
here used in serious violations of
international humanitarian law could
this set some kind of of precedent might
we see other European countries
following
suit absolutely this I think the lawyer
will definitely see this as a precedent
and a jurisdiction for other countries
uh to uh file similar cases we know of
course Germany uh has a huge weapons
deal with Israel most of the weapons in
the in Europe are being sent from
Germany well anyone any NGO anyone can
send file a case against uh the state
there as well and as can be done also in
the United States and other countries as
well so def definitely the NOS in the
Netherlands and also the lawyers who
have filed this case see this as a very
important landmark and uh ruling with a
very strong uh possibility of being a
pres for other countries step vasson
there were the latest for us on that
ruling from the Netherlands thanks so
much St